Update and delete (#8)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2: more-flask-queries/query-params.md

There can be multiple query param pairs. They are comma-separated. Here's an example:

```
https://my-beautiful.site/search?category=novels&minimum_pages=800&maximum_pages=8000
```

| Query Param Key | Query Param Value |
| --------------- | ----------------- |
| `category`      | `novels`          |
| `minimum_pages` | `800`             |
| `maximum_pages` | `8000`            |

### An Aside: URL Encoding and Query Strings

It would be nice if valid query strings and valid query params could always be straightforward strings.

```
https://my-beautiful.site/search?name=Hand-crafted exclusive: finest tote bag!
```

However, some characters aren't handled very well in URLs, such as spaces, colons, commas, and so on. These characters need to be encoded into a valid URL format, which replaces them.

```
https://my-beautiful.site/search?name=Hand-crafted%20exclusive%3A%20finest%20tote%20bag%21
```

From this example, we can observe:

| Original character | Encoding character |
| ------------------ | ------------------ |
| ` ` (space)        | `%20`              |
| `:`                | `%3A`              |
| `!`                | `%21`              |

> Often, the work of encoding happens _through the client_, not through the server. However, this knowledge may be helpful when constructing URLs with query strings for testing!

Reviewer: expand the guidance around when url encoding might be necessary
I really wanted to spell out that the replacement sequence is a percent followed by the ascii code of the character to replace encoded as 2 hexadecimal digits, but the curriculum only mentions ascii in passing once, and NEVER mentions hexadecimal.

More lightning talk candidates? (ascii/unicode, hexadecimal/number bases)

```suggestion
If we are using a program like Postman or a web browser to send requests, they will do their best to encode our URLs for us. If we are writing code to contact an endpoint, we may need to encode parts of the URL ourselves, using functionality built into Python.

We will try to avoid characters that require encoding in our URLs and query parameters. However, this knowledge may be helpful when constructing URLs with query strings for testing!
```

Author: Just added these topic suggestions for Unit 3 lightning talks, thank you!!!

### Typical Use Cases

Query params provide extra information to an HTTP request.

> HTTP response bodies and query params are both responsible for adding data to a request, and can both accomplish similar things. The exact difference in usage will always depend on your project, context, and needs.

Reviewer: also mention route parameters
```suggestion
HTTP request bodies, route parameters, and query params are all responsible for adding data to a request, and can accomplish similar things. The exact difference in usage will always depend on your project, context, and needs.
```

> However, typically:
> 
> - HTTP response bodies contain data that should be uploaded to the server
> - Query params contain data that describe the nature of the request

Reviewer: we don't need both however and typically
include info about route parameters
describe the nature seems vague. suggest presenting as customizing the request
```suggestion
In the style of web API we are building, typically:

- HTTP request bodies contain data that should be uploaded to the server
- Route parameters contain data that identifies a particular record
- Query params contain data that select customized behaviors
```

> We may often see query params used for:

Reviewer: a little less hedge-y
```suggestion
Common uses for query params include:
```

- Sorting and filtering search results
- Limiting the amount of data that comes back

## Reading Query Params From a Request

Within Flask, we can get the value from any query param using the `request.args` object.

```python
query_param_value = request.args.get(query_param_key)
```

| <div style="min-width:250px;"> Piece of Code </div> | Notes                                                                                  |
| --------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `query_param_value =`                               | We can make a local variable to represent the value of the param                       |

Reviewer: it doesn't represent the value. we store the value there
```suggestion
| `query_param_value =`                               | A local variable in which we store the looked up value of a query param for later use  |
```

| `request.args.get(...)`                             | Inside of a route, we can access the value of a query param using this method          |
| `query_param_key`                                   | We should put in the query param key here, either as a variable or as a string literal |

### !callout-warning

## Pro-tip: Check `request` Spelling

> The popular package `requests`, used for making HTTP requests, is not the same as the `request` that represents the HTTP request.

Reviewer: good idea to call this out, but I feel like providing a little more context about when to pay attention might help
```suggestion
The popular package `requests`, used for making HTTP requests, is not the same as the `request` that represents the HTTP request. If we are working on a web API project that also calls external APIs by using the `requests` package, we should be especially careful of whether we have written `request` or `requests`!
```

### !end-callout

## Using Query Params

> How we use query params now depends on our project needs, and using whatever Python strategies we need!

Reviewer: I don't think the use of query params has much to do with python intrinsically.
```suggestion
The way we choose to use query params will depend on our project needs.
```

## Finding Books by Title: Preparation

Consider this feature:

> As a client, I want to send a request trying to get a list of books with a matching title, so I know which books have a matching title.

> ### Predict HTTP Requests, Responses, and Logic

Reviewer: same change as elsewhere
```suggestion
### Planning HTTP Requests, Responses, and Logic
```

> Let's consider the endpoint to get a single book:

Reviewer: (seems like a copy paste error)
actively discuss why this modification goes with the existing get all route
```suggestion
We want to get a list of book results, so the base of our endpoint will look like our usual endpoint to get all records of a particular type. We will use the `GET` verb sent to the `/books` endpoint. But now we'd also like to provide an additional parameter `title` that we can use to filter the results. Since filtering is a customization of the default _get all_ behavior, we can decide to express that as a query param.
```

| HTTP Method | Endpoint              |
| ----------- | --------------------- |
| `GET`       | `/books?title=Apples` |

> No request body.

Reviewer: acknowledge why we don't need it
```suggestion
As usual, we don't need a request body for `GET` requests.
```

> This assumes that there is at least a `book` table with the following rows. (The contents of `id`, `description`, and `completed_at` are irrelevant for this feature).

Reviewer: similar 'at least' change as elsewhere
completed at seems copy paste from task list
```suggestion
This assumes that there is a `book` table with at least the following rows. (The contents of `id`, and `description` are irrelevant for this feature).
```

| `title`   |
| --------- |
| `Apples`  |
| `Oranges` |

> The response we want to send back is:

Reviewer: remind what we want the response to do
```suggestion
In response to the request we've discussed, we want the endpoint to return success for the status code, and a list of the books with a matching title. We can use `200 OK` for the response status code, and a JSON response body representing a list of books.
```

| Response Status | Response Body                                            |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |
| `200 OK`        | `[{"id": ..., "title": "Apples", "description": "..."}]` |

> During this method, we will need to:

Reviewer: essentially the same transition as elsewhere
```suggestion
Now that we have planned out these changes to our endpoint behavior, we can turn our attention to how to implement them.

Our endpoint will need to:
```

1. Check if the HTTP method is `GET`
1. Check if we have a query param for `title`

> 1. If we have a `title` query param, retrieve all of the books from the db that match

Reviewer: set up for a "pre-refactored" solution. If all we need to do is decide our source of books, we don't need to present a repetitive version where we have to generate the JSON book results twice. instead, we can jump to a better version where we get books from one of two branches, but the rendering remains unified.
```suggestion
1. If we have a `title` query param, retrieve all of the books from the database that match, otherwise retrieve all books as usual
```

1. Format the books data into the appropriate structure (list of dictionaries, where each dictionary has `id`, `title`, and `description`)
1. Send back a response

> ## Finding Books by Title: Pseudocode

Reviewer: providing real code
```suggestion
## Finding Books by Title: Code
```

> For this feature, we must return to our `GET` `"/books"` endpoint and re-work it.

Reviewer: While bringing this into alignment with previous edits, I noticed that we're a little inconsistent around how we refer to the routes. We had been referring to the show-like route as /<book_id>, even though it should be /books/<book_id>. So I put in some wiggle room here for both /books and "", but I'm a little unhappy. I might just need to be okay with this...
```suggestion
This endpoint uses the same path as our existing `/books` route that lists books. Recall that the `"/books"` part comes from the blueprint, so our route path is set to `""`.
```

> Let's look at this example pseudocode for one strategy:

Reviewer: we're presenting actual code
```suggestion
Let's modify our endpoint code to filter the results when a title query param is supplied.
```

```python

> @books_bp.route("", methods=["GET", "POST"])
> def books():
>     if request.method == "GET":
>         # Check if the query param "title" exists
>         # by using request.args.get("title")
>             # Query the db for all matching books
>             # Create a response
>             # Return it
>         # Else if the query param "title" does not exist
>             # Query the db for all books...
>             # Create a response...
>             # Return it...
>     # ... no other changes

Reviewer: revised with real code
went with handle_books for now. Change may be required with further PR?
The `if` that picks which `books` to use _could_ use ternary notation, but in the same way the examples avoid list comprehensions, I thought avoiding ternary would be better.
```suggestion
@books_bp.route("", methods=["GET", "POST"])
def handle_books():
    if request.method == "GET":
        # this code replaces the previous query all code
        title_query = request.args.get("title")
        if title_query:
            books = Book.query.filter_by(title=title_query)
        else:
            books = Book.query.all()
        # end of the new code

        books_response = []
        for book in books:
            books_response.append({
                "id": book.id,
                "title": book.title,
                "description": book.description
            })

        return jsonify(books_response)
    # ... existing code for creating a new book
```

```

> 

Reviewer: code description
```suggestion

| <div style="min-width:270px;"> Piece of Code </div> | Notes                                                                                                                                                           |
| --------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `title_query = ...`                                 | Store the result of looking for the `title` query param in the variable `title_query`                                                                           |
| `... = request.args.get("title")`                   | Try to get a query param called `title` from the `request`. This returns the value of the query param if it was set, or `None` if the query param is not found. |
| `if title_query:`                                   | Decide which conditional branch to take by checking whether we got a query param with which to filter                                                           |
| `books = ...`                                       | Store the results of our query in the `books` variable.                                                                                                         |
| `... = Book.query.filter_by( ... )`                 | If we got a query param, we will make a `filter_by` call to filter the results.                                                                                 |
| `title=title_query`                                 | Filter the book query results to those whose titles match the query param                                                                                       |
| `... = Book.query.all()`                            | If we didn't get a query param, get all the books as before.                                                                                                    |

The remainder of the code is the same as it was previously.

To summarize, we looked up whether the `title` query param was provided. We used that to decide which query we should run, and we stored the result in `books`. Then we converted `books` into JSON as before and returned the result.

```

### Manually Testing in Postman

We can use Postman to manually test our database.

We can compare our original feature which gets all books, to filtering by title.

```
GET localhost:5000/books
GET localhost:5000/books?title=Apples
```

> Our actual results will vary, depending on the contents of our databases. For example, if we've never created a `Book` with the title "Apple," then we'll never be able to retrieve that record!

Reviewer: the "never able" makes it sound like we can never create a book with a title of Apple, so reworked that
```suggestion
Our actual results will vary, depending on the contents of our databases. For example, if we haven't created any `Book`s with the title "Apple," then the second test will always return an empty list!
```

> Different records on different databases will change our tests and results.

Reviewer: this sounds a bit throw-away. added the "predict, then test" to sneak in an additional takeaway
```suggestion
We should practice trying to predict the results of a test before running it to check our understanding. But we must take into account what records exist in our database, since this will affect our tests and results.
```
